Did you like teaching? Oh, yes. Now that you're on
the other side here. Very much so. I alluded to
something about mass punishment earlier in our
talk.
The cadet wing Air Force Wing
saw fit to campus all of its juniors at one time.
What happened, somebody let the air out of all the
seniors' tires. The seniors had a parking lot,
they may still have, where only seniors could
park. So somebody let the air out of their tires.
And all the seniors got together and they camped
with the juniors. Well, at that time, I was the
senior instructor for Air Science 4, which are the
seniors. And I had three, four other instructors
who were also teaching Air Science 4. And I said,
now, I'm getting ready to do something. I don't
want you to criticize what I'm doing. I'm not
asking that you do it. And if you're questioned by
any of your students, just make some remark, well,
I haven't even thought about that, or I haven't
heard about it, or whatever you want to say. Just
don't get in the act. So, first class, I walk in, and
of course they come to attention. Good morning,
gentlemen. This morning, before we take up the
lesson for the day, we're going to have a standby
inspection of uniform. I just went down the line
and said, mister, I said, Isn't your tie tucked in
at the wrong place? Doesn't it belong between the
second and third button? Yes, sir. Okay, that's
two diversions. Everybody in here says that's two
diversions. Take a seat. I had three sections.
Second section came along, same thing. Mister,
don't you have on the wrong color sock? I've never
seen that color sock with a uniform. Yes, sir.
That's it. Non-rigged socks, that's two
demerits, isn't it? Yes, sir. I said, everyone in
the section is assessed two demerits. Take your
seats. Third section came along, did the same
thing. When the first section came back to class
two days later, good morning, gentlemen. We're
going to have a standby inspection again this
morning. The wing commander was in that class. He
said, sir, may I speak? I said, yes, sir. I said,
Major, are you trying to tell us that mass
punishment is wrong? I said, well, it didn't take
you long to learn, did it? He said, well, for your
information, we have released the juniors from
their restriction to campus. I said, for your
information, all those who are still on my desk may
have gone to the Commandant's office. Get your ass
out of here and go find out who let the air out of your
tires and then punish them to the hilt. And it
worked.
Not only those three sections, but it spread
through all the other sections. Well, I had some
real interesting times.
I was the sponsor of Squadron 7. Squadron 7 may not
be what it used to be. But at that time, it was the top
unit on the campus. I mean, scholastically,
intramurally, it just took all of the trophies.
And this was two years, the first two years I was
there. And one day this Colonel John Way, who was a
professor of air science, said, you know, when
you're on top, It's easy to stay on top. I said, why
don't you go get something that you don't have? I
said, you name it, Colonel. What is it? He says,
let's see you take the Houston military away from
that infantry outfit. We'll do it. So I went down to
squadron seven and called us cadet officers in. I
said, you've got a challenge, because I'm going to
give you the challenge. And I've got the challenge
because the colonel put it on me. I said, we're
going to win the Houston military. God, our outfit
could never win that. Hell, it can't. And of
course, the march-ins at football games are
graded, and certain march-ins to the dining hall
are graded. Everything military goes to the
Houston military. Sure enough, Mother's Day,
when it was announced, Squadron 7, Houston
military. Well... That year I had a compassionate
reassignment from A&M up to that Aviation
Engineer Force because one of our children was
sick and ultimately died.
When Final Review came around, have you ever seen a
Final Review before? When Final Review came
around and First time they came around, you know,
they saluted the commandant and all that
business. And then they all went back out and got in
the huddle, you know, and they put on their bars and
everything, you know, and turned everything over
to the juniors, and the juniors stepped up. They
came walking across that field, and they handed me
four sets of ropes, and it was all of them, the
scholastic, the intramural,
whatever the other one was, and then the Houston
military. They said, here, Major. We know you
can't wear them, but you can do something with
them. And we had just built up a spree that, by
golly, I stepped back, and they ran their outfit,
and they came to me when they needed help, when they
wanted something. And
it was just one of the greatest things that had ever
happened to me. A bunch of cadets were doing it.
But... That old professor, he said, I never
thought it would happen. I said, John, all you've
got to do is just have a good bunch of cadets. He was
from Oklahoma. I said, now you Hokies just don't
understand. He died here last year.
Were you sorry to leave AM99 after three years? Or
were you ready for a transfer? Oh, I think we were
ready. Our daughter contracted polio and an
epidemic they had up there. She ultimately died of
bronchial
pneumonia. But I was ready to get moving
and let's start.
So your next assignment then was Director of
Operations, Aviation, Engineering, Engineer
Force, which you had from 1955 to 1956. Now, what
were your functions there? And where was it
first? Well, the Aviation Engineer Force was
there at Walters, Mineral Wells. Oh, okay. Yeah.
Which you talked about. Right. Yeah. And
Navigation Engine Air Force is exactly what it
said. It was, believe it or not, it was a bunch of
Army troops that also had Air Force enlisted
personnel and Air Force officers assigned to
them. And they were under the control of the Air
Force under a term called SCARWAW. Special
Category Army with Air Force. And they were
dedicated solely to construction of Air Force
installations and bases and wherever the Air
Force wanted them to go. And I had both operations
and then at one time planned the program, which was
worldwide assignment and utilization, war and
peace, and figuring out how many battalions,
regiments, brigades were needed in various parts
of the country to support
whatever the mission was and how many flying units
we had.
I guess one of the most interesting projects that
we worked on, though, was I had an Army captain and
an Air Force captain working for me, and we put
together a manual that had never been assembled. I
mean, you could go here and get this and here and get
that, but we assembled a manual that could
actually be carried onto a job, and it was recovery
of an Air Force installation following nuclear
attack. so that they didn't have to carry a library
as big as that over there. They just carried one
manual, and the whole thing was there. And it took
us about six months to put the thing together, and
it was ultimately published. And even though they
abolished SCARWOF, and all those Army troops went
back to the Army, and our Air Force went back into
our own engineering units, base maintenance
units, We still buy copies of the manual around.
Of course, this was a period when the atomic bomb
and, well, when we were building up our atomic
arsenal. Was there a lot of interest within the Air
Force at this time?
Oh, yeah, very definitely. I used to kid my
contemporaries that If I went over to the Planning
and Programming Office, over on one corner of the
desk, I had worldwide utilization of aviation
engineer forces, and then over on this, return of
SCARWAC units to the Army. If a breeze came along
and mixed these papers, you know, well, that was
the biggest job we had for months, because here we
were planning how to use these guys for years in a
war and peace, and over here, I'll give them back to
the Army within 30 days. But you go through that
quite often. Of course, this is a time when the Air
Force is enlarging, and we're getting now into
strategic air command. Were you building a lot of
air bases at this time? Yeah. because of the
agreements with the labor and so on, these units
would stay in a training status most of the time,
but could be used downrange, down the Bahamas, in
Iceland, and we could use them in the Pacific, but
not in the Connus in the continental United States
because that was to be left open for bidding on the
economy. What were the major bases that you built?
Well, no base per se, but additional facilities at
Thule, for instance, at Hickam itself. So you were
back in the construction field. Yeah. And at
Tachikawa in Japan, at Clark.
Did you have any dealings with any of the building
that was going on in the new line, any of the
Canadian strategic defenses at that time? No, I
didn't at that time. I did later on, but not at that
time. of course this is a time with the enlargement
of the strategic air command did you have any
dealings with any construction as far as they were
concerned no see most of theirs were caught us and
they'd be under contract under contract okay and
of course this is the 50s was an era when general
curtis lemay was very influential in the airport
did you ever have an opportunity to meet him or see
him i have not only met the general i have briefed
him i've helped dressed him really oh yeah oh would
you tell me about that well when i say i helped dress
him later in in the career let's see that'd be three
four four years after this Air Force, when LeMay
was chief of staff, I had to brief General LeMay.
General Bradley was then the vice chief. And he
said, now, remember, speak directly to him. And
don't look at me, because he's hard of hearing, and
he will not wear a hearing aid.
But be distinct. Of course, I'd had all of this
already, and it didn't bother me because I had
reached bigger people in LeMay. LeMay comes in to
the room, and he leans over like this to sit down,
and these four stars had come on the hook, and they
just started swinging like this. And he looked
like a roar of Boer Alice. There were so many stars
just swinging through the air. And I said,
gentlemen, your stars are falling. Your stars are
falling. God damn, this little man didn't get
those things fixed right. Here, hook him up. So
with that, I don't know whether you heard the rest
of the briefing or not.
We had a We've jumped four years, but he's a very
outspoken man, which is great. By the way, he was an
Ohio State civil engineer. I don't know whether
you knew that or not, but even engineers become
pretty good leaders. We were getting ready to
modernize the officer's club at Bowling. There
were a couple of concepts as to how to do it. And oh
boy, we're seven or eight years ahead now. Because
by that time, I was in the Secretary of the Air Force
office. And there was a group in his office with a
model of the officer's club. And there must have
been about 16 or 18 officers, including me. They
got to talking about the concept. And now, see,
here everybody works for him except me, and I work
for the Secretary of the Air Force. And one of these
guys says, General LeMay, Mr. Zuckert, who is the
Secretary of the Air Force, Mr. Zuckert thinks
that we ought to do so-and-so.
Oh, you know that stuff. Oh, you go tell Mr. Zuckert
to piss off a rope. Now he's talking about my boss.
And about half those eyes look at me like, what's
Zucker going to
do? He was exactly what was needed at the time.
Capable individual.
Not afraid to speak out. I'm sure that
we bought time with a lot of his boldness, his
bluff, and that we needed. Was there a friction
between the Strategic Air Command and other parts
of the Air Force? Always is. Why? Well, you trace as
a rule who would go to the top. to run the Air Force,
you'd always find that they came out of the
strategic command. Strategic air command would
graduate to the top.
And training command and tactical air command did
never make it up. They'd make it so high, but they'd
never get to the top. And so that's most of it.
That is not really where most of the
animosity
and friction really is. There are other places
that have friction.
In our business,
And it didn't bother me, because I wore a blue suit.
But
remember I said earlier that at West Point, when
you graduated, and they rank the class, and then
everybody gets to pick what branch they want to go
into.
The top of the class usually picks the Corps of
Engineers. It's a good honorable profession and
it provides you something to do after you leave the
service. It's a damn good service to be in. And then
they go on down the line. And the bottom is the
infantry.
Well, years ago this happened and still does. And
so before the Air Force had its own academy, before
the Air Force started building its own system,
this guy would say, I'm going to aviation cadets
before I go to the infantry.
OK, now you've got a guy that's down here in the
bottom quarter of the class that went to aviation
cadets
instead of going to the infantry. which he would
have had to done, because there was none of this
other choice assignments left. He comes out of
aviation cadets, and all these guys go along for 25
years, and now here you got, at the top of the Air
Force, a guy that was in the bottom quarter of the
class, and you got this engineer group sitting
over here that was at the top of the class, and
they're just like that.
Now, it's getting better as we get our own people
out of the Air Force Academy. Because we're not
getting as many of this bottom quarter coming out
of West Point or coming out of Annapolis or Point.
Let me tell you, it was rough. I mean, again, not me,
because I'm wearing blue. But you go in to brief one
of these commanders and tell him, The core, don't
tell me about the core. Just, you know, turn
themselves off. I don't believe it. You go back
over there and you tell that core, you know.
There's just a lot of animosity in between. And,
you know, you can expect it. It's built in. I mean,
it's there. Anytime you've got the rank and file
system,
and they can carry it for years.
Well, we jumped from a... Well, I wanted to ask
about the Mayan SAC because these things are very
important as far as the history of the Air Force is
concerned. And they're always interested in
problems or the relationship between some people
who aren't in the Strategic Air Command and those
who are. Well, fortunately, we've got a thing
right now that is going to help We have a four-star
general in command of the training command whose
headquarters is here at Randolph. And on the 28th
of this month, he moves to Sac, and he takes over
Sac. And he happens to be the youngest four-star
general in the Air Force. He's only 52 years old. So
he's got some years to go. And conceivably,
General Davis will someday be the chief of staff.
We've got to remember that he made his fourth star
at training command, not at SAC, and quite a
capable individual.
What we've got, believe it or not right now, is
we've got a little tug and push and shove between
research and developers and tacticians.
Sure.
And that's not all bad. Not all bad. If the research
and developers can come up with some fancy beam
warfare that makes it quicker and saves a hell of a
lot of lives, why should the tacticians always
have the principles of war boss comes and matches
the first one, you don't always need matches.
Okay, so then you went to France right after that in
1956. That was terrific. Were you eager to get
overseas again? Well, I hadn't been overseas.
They offered me Alaska or France and though in my
master's study at A&M I studied Creopediology,
which is permafrost, I chose France. A little bit
nicer place to live. A little more action. The
organizations are larger. You got a two-star in
command in Alaska. You got a four-star in command
in Europe. I
think your chances are better in Europe. We went
over and I was a resident engineer at two bases. One
has already been completed, but we were
lengthening the runway and doing some more
facility work. Where was that? That was Shomal.
Shomal happens to be one of the locations that
Black Jack Pershing had his headquarters during
World War I. Shomal, Sur Marne, the Marne River.
The other one was Shalon Battery, which was a brand
new base that had only a runway and a few
facilities. And it was a NATO base. That's what
NATO gave us here, a runway and a few facilities.
And we were pouring American dollars into
building another base. And that's where I spent
most of my time.
My deputy was an Army civil servant, and I worked
with the French ,, which is roads and bridges, who
was the contracting officer to the French
contractors, even though the work was being done
for us and paid for by us. they left the contract.
And it was strictly the rapport that he and I
maintained as to how much pressure we put on the
contractors to deliver what was right and so on.
And we ended up, even though I was not there when it
was completed, I hadn't been moved to Africa by
then, but a very, very minimum of claims from the
contractor. At that time, I worked for an Army
colonel. So I was, again, mixed into this joint
service thing. And I truthfully must say, just by
having lived the Corps life and being able to
adjust to just about anything, I don't care
whether the guy's Army, Navy, or what. what the guy
produces, how he treats people.
Anyway, we got along fine. At this time, of course,
France was still in NATO, and they pulled out a few
years after that. How are the relations with the
French army, or the French officers? Great.
Great? Still great? Yeah. In 56 and 57? Yep.
Terrific. Yeah, the fact is, you see, on that whole
tour, I felt this because,
like you say, how it was in relation then. Then when
I left there and went down to North Africa for a
short period of time and I went to England, that's
where I really felt it because when we pulled out of
England, I mean pulled out of France, we brought
them to England, you see. Because there we brought
the units that we pulled out of France. We brought
them in to England. And that's where we had nuke
storage rights. And I got to England just in time to
start programming and building up facilities for
those units that just two or three years ahead I had
helped facilitate over there in France. Chaumont
actually moved from The unit at Chaumont, where
the 48th Fighter moved from there to Lake and
Heath, England.
Again,
I made the statement, the French individual is
great. Collectively, they're a bunch of bums.
Especially if they're on the highway. Boy,
they're horrible. They're the worst drivers I've
ever seen. And in downtown Paris. How many people
did you have working for you when you were a
resident engineer here in France? About 9 or 10, I
guess. And were they engineers? Yeah. Yes. And
they were both American and French. Oh. Yeah. And
so how would it work? The Air Force would say, okay,
we want you to go build this landing strip or
something like that, or go build a building on this
base, and then you'd sit down and draw the plans?
No, we did not design it. All we did was just
supervise the construction. Oh, okay. The plans
came to us from our own organization in Paris.
Okay. That was the joint construction they were
headed by. Well, it would alternate. One term it
would be an Army guy, the next term it would be a
Navy, and the next term it would be an Air Force. And
then it would just keep rotating. And it was called
the Joint Construction Agency. Everybody in
there was just a mixture. Is this Joint
Construction Agency? Is that a fairly new output?
No, it's no longer in existence. It's no longer OK.
Yeah. Tell me a little bit about that. I mean, when
did they start this agency? I've never seen it. OK.
Let's
see. We went over and they started just for the
task. Why do they have this agency? They started
just for the task of building bases?
Let's see. We went over. It must
have started about 51 or 52. And when we left there
to go down to Africa, it was phasing down then. And
the only reason they pulled me out early is the
officer that I had worked for at the Aviation and
Air Force asked for me in Africa. He was down there.
And he asked, he says, since you're phasing down,
can you send Johnson to me now? He'd been trying for
a year to get me down here. And so they finally said,
yeah, we'll let him go. Now, why did they even have
this agency, the Joint Construction Agency? Just
to explain, why did they even institute it?
I can't
answer the question
with 100% assurance that I'm right, because
there was so much demand for construction
throughout, I have to remember where all it was
now, in Italy. in Greece, Spain, in Germany, in
France, that somebody made the decision that it
was bigger than the Corps of Engineers could
handle on its own, and that the Navy ought to have a
voice in it, and the Air Force ought to have a voice
in it, especially when it affected their own civil
combat agency. So they formed this thing. Now,
when it fell apart at the time I went to Africa, then
it went back to Army everywhere in Europe except
England, and that belongs to the Air Force, and the
Navy in Spain. And the Army has all the rest of it,
even now. So the building then, they had
accomplished the mission of that building in
those six or seven years that it was in existence.
And then they decided to phase it out, and the Corps
could handle whatever building was necessary.
OK. All right. So you went to Libya in 1957 as
the director engineer. And construction,
engineering and construction. I had 36 people
working for me there. And we had. Did they give you a
promotion or not? No, I was still a major. I made
Lieutenant Colonel while there.
We had Morocco, Libya, Italy, Greece, and Turkey.
That's where our units were scattered, in those
five countries.
Well, it wasn't too bad. We had one base in Italy. We
had one base in Greece, we had two in Morocco, we had
one in Libya, but we had about five or six in Turkey
and Crete.
A good bit of traveling then. So did you travel
around from base to base doing any, you know,
anytime they needed some construction?
Yeah. Were there major operations? We
handled two different types of operations. At
that time, a
minor construction project was something that
ran from $25,000 to $100,000. And that we could
design, and if the command had the money, commit
the money and go. If it was major construction, it
had to go before the Congress for congressional
approval and appropriation. We would work with
the programmers to define it, and the programmers
would put it on the documents and get it on up the
line and then get it approved. Once it was
approved, then we would work with the Corps of
Engineers to see that they designed what we
intended to have built. and they'd take over and
finish the design, let the contract, supervise
the contract, and then we would run the acceptance
inspection and so on. So it's kind of a split
operation. It's part of what the magnitude was.
Like a big hangar at Tripoli, Libya, Wheeler. All
that we did was define the project and say, this is
what we want, and then look over the core shoulder
and say, OK, we agree with the design. Build it. And
then they'd build it. Did Mrs. Johnson get to go
with you to Libya? Yes, and both boys. We have two
boys. So she was in France with you and in Libya, and
then in the United Kingdom? Yeah. Oh, good. So what
were the conditions like in Libya? Well, when we
were there they were great because we moved right
into the first place we lived was a brand new
masonry house. So new that it hadn't even seasoned
and you could be sitting like we are here talking
and least little rise in temperature and
something would go. And a seed would pop out of a
little plaster. They hadn't used clean sand, and
it was a grass seed, you know. We'd be talking some
more, and something would go... And another one
would pop out up there. But all in all, they were
good. And we moved from there to another, what they
call, villa. And then, ultimately, we moved on
base in the base quarters.
We had... I'd say an above average houseboy. The
women don't work down there. The men work. You can
do the domestic work. We found it pretty
interesting.
It gave my older boy, or our older boy, a challenge
in life and an outlook that has led to his
profession. He is a graduate of American
University.
International Relations and his postgraduate
master's degree from the University of Utah. He is
a Persian expert. He speaks Arabic, Fazi, French,
as well as English. He happens to be a major in the
Air Force. That is interesting. And this is where
he picked up that interest. That first challenge.
Well, why did you only stay there for about a year
and then go to the United Kingdom in 1959? The tour
in Libya is what they call a short tour. And I
offered them a short extension in Libya or a long
extension in the United Kingdom. And the
personnel people and the civil engineer people
got to wrestling. And they said, well, under the
conditions, what's happening in the United
Kingdom? let's move into the United Kingdom. And
what was happening that they needed to? That's
when these units in France were being programmed
into England and into Germany. Okay, let's talk
about this. I've heard some interesting comments
about when we moved out of France. Okay, the
project of the move of Air Force units from France
to England was called Red Richard. That was the
code word. It was an unclassified code word. But
anything that was Red Richard, everybody knew
money-wise, program-wise, that was to get a unit
or had to do with moving from France to the United
Kingdom. And I
was titled Director of Project Management. I had
master planning, planning, programming, and
fiscal control under me in the United Kingdom in
civil engineering, which put me right in sitting
with the commanders and the engineers and the
general from headquarters Air Force Europe that
with the units moving out as to what they needed and
what had to be done to the bases that, you know, that
they were designated to go to and so on. What we had
to do with emergency money, which is, you know, the
money that we had right now that we could use, what
we had to go back to Congress to get approval on and
so on. But the project was called Red Richard. And
it was just one of those all-night, all-day
things. You get it done and... What were the
feelings toward the French in your command at this
time?
Well, I think the feeling in our command,
being on the continent, those units weren't in our
command. They were in the 16th Air Force, I guess it
was. And everybody in the United Kingdom was in the
3rd Air Force. Well, they weren't our units until
they moved to us. You know, in the United Kingdom,
it was kind of nice a lot. But the overall feeling
was that, you know, the French have really slipped
through, after all. For years, we've been pouring
money into there. And for years, they've been part
of the program. And now, this has happened.
But even now, today, in 81, you know, they're not
completely out of it. No. You know? It's a crazy
agreement or arrangement, but
it's been harmful to the total force, but we've
lived with it. I've heard some comments from other
generals saying that when the American forces
moved out of France and moved everything, even the
telephones and everything that they could, it was
at the... Was that the order that came down from
Tom? Well... Or was that just resentment?
No. I wouldn't say it was resentment. I'd say that
was, you know, move whatever you can. You know,
you've got to make this move with the least amount
of additional expenditure. At Chambord, when we
first got to France as a resident engineer and Our
first quarters were on Showmont. Later we moved
over near the other base.
That weekend or the very next weekend, they
dedicated a Statue of Liberty that bronze or brass
was about that tall, standing on a pedestal that
was again about that tall. And that thing had been
built from the pattern that the statue is made in
the New York Harbor. But when that unit moved from
Showmont to Lake and Heath, they even took the
Statue of Liberty with them. Vive la France, and
we're back to help in all this business. And then
two years later, you can stay, but your nukes have
got to go. Well, what does a nuclear force do?
Where did you store the nuclear weapons that
America had in France? Yeah, did we store them back
in Great Britain? Oh, yeah. Yeah, we've got
terrific storage facilities in Britain. And did
you help construct those? Oh, yeah. Some of the
units, though, now went to Germany. All of them did
not go to England. We picked up there were, in
France, there was nuclear
either three or four wings. We got two of them in and
Germany got through them. The rest were
transported out. The pressure wasn't on on them.
They ultimately moved them out also. The pressure
was to maintain the nuclear force in Europe.
Was there special problems with building sites
where you could store nuclear weapons? No. But we
already had them. We already had nuclear weapons
in England. And so you just, you didn't have to
expand them, they were large enough? No, they had
to be expanded.
Bases were, like we had a combination of
Bentwater's Woodbridge, two bases about six
miles apart, that one wing had. It had two
squadrons on one location and one on the other. We
put another squadron in there that belonged to one
of these outfits coming in. So you build up a little
more facility. But fortunately in England, where
we have ammo and nuke storage, the British had
pretty good foresight and put sufficient
clearance around them.
So was that your major task when you were in England
for those two years, 1959 and 1960? Yeah, I guess it
was for that period.
Two
interesting things happened then. You asked
earlier, way back there before A&M, I happened to
be the district commissioner of the Mayflower
District of the Boy Scouts of America. And that was
just made up of Boy Scout units in the United
Kingdom. So that was a freebie job, a service job.
And the man that I worked for in England during that
time period was the first one that my own
effectiveness report ever since.